---
layout: single
title:  "The MVP"
date: January 16, 2020
tags: product management
excerpt: first post in the series of posts
header:
    image: /assets/images/posts/The MVP/giphy.gif

---
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/The MVP/giphy.gif" alt="test" caption="credits: giphy" %}
# The MVP
At the start of this year, I made a bold resolution to my friends, like we all do (and terribly fail!) — “I’m gonna publish a blog every week this year”. Judging by how long it has taken for me to publish this post, you can clearly tell how well that resolution is coming along. Where’s the fun in easy goals, right? Let’s see how long I can keep this up. So without much ado, here we go.

## The What

This will be a blog for students and anybody that’s trying to decode what Product Management(PM) actually is. Product Management has different flavors at different organizations. There are plenty of resources available over the internet about how to break into PM, the PM interview questions, the CIRCLES framework, etc., but very few talk about how it is executed in different organizations, how did one become a PM, what product managers do on a daily basis, the tools they use, etc. This is my attempt to understand that. There are 4 series that I want this blog to be about:-

**Sliding into PM**: Every superhero has an origin story. One got bit by a spider, while another used his intellect and an engineer friend to survive death by building a flying suit. Likewise, every product manager was not born with the aim of becoming one. They started somewhere, explored multiple avenues, and then settled on the PM role. I wish to explore these origin stories. I plan to interview multiple product managers and learn how they got their start, the key decisions they made to choose this path, and how has it fared so far. I also plan to learn from people who work with product managers and learn how PM plays a vital role in their organization. I hope I find enough people willing to talk to me about it though because you see superheroes are always busy ‘making the world a better place’.

**F is for Failure**: Circling back to the superhero analogy, almost every superhero has failed massively somewhere, only to bounce back and save the world (except Saitama). Similarly, every product manager or any professional, for that matter, have had their set of failures that define them and their journey. Of all the blogs I read and podcasts I listen to, very few discuss these failures. What lessons did these failures teach them? What measures do they take to avoid committing the same mistakes again in the future? Through my conversations with the people I interview, I plan to discuss these failures and what role they played in their journey.

**This Week I Learned(TWIL)/This Month I Learned(TMIL)**: Just like every superhero trains their superpowers for hours, every professional practices their skills for hours too. There’s immense truth in the phrase ‘Practice makes perfect’. With that being said, in this series, I will learn a software program, try to complete a project using it, and jot down my learnings while doing it. Yes! I know that there are a lot of programs in the world, how will I even decide what to learn? Simple. Whatever makes me a better PM in the future. Depending on the complexity of learning, I’ll decide if I want to commit to it for a week or a month. Initially, I’m committing two hours every day to learn the program for a week and finish my project. If it’s too complex, I’ll continue for a month. “14 hours? That’s too less!!”, you say? The plan is to learn how to use it, not be the greatest at it. If I enjoy it, I’m going to continue using it. I plan to explore the learning curve of these programs. Are they as simple as they claim to be? We’ll find out. For my first project, I start learning Figma.

**This Month in Memes**: ‘All work no play makes Sid a dull boy’. ‘Nuff said. This is self-explanatory. I have no plans of how to pan this one out but I, sure as hell, am going to have fun while doing this.

## The Why

**The short answer**: It’s because I currently have time to learn things I’m interested in. So might as well be productive with it.

**The long answer**: I enjoy writing. I have thousands of notes on my Google Keep. Stories. Screenplays. Class notes. Meeting notes. Notes from a Book. Podcast notes. But these are unstructured notes. I write whenever I feel like, or as they say, whenever ‘inspiration strikes’. This year I wanted to experiment with structured writing. Having a framework and working along those lines. So the answer, as my friends pointed out, is to ‘BLOG!’.

**But why Product Management? Why not anything else?**

Simply put, to learn! To learn from people in the field. To learn the tools people use. And to learn to communicate effectively. ‘Communication is key’ — One of the most echoed advice by all the PM veterans is the ability of clear and concise communication as a crucial skillset to have. Therefore, what better way to learn communication than writing, right?

## The How

Honestly, this is the toughest part. Referencing this fantastic quote from this video I saw in my Product Design class, “Commit. Then figure it out.” Well, I’ve committed to it. But it’s one thing to commit something and a whole different dimension of effort to execute it. The only answer I have at this point is I don’t know how I’ll do it but I’m committed to see this through. Over the course of the next few weeks, I’ll be reaching out to a few really smart and kind superheroes (my mentors in PM) who helped me with their advice when I sought guidance for my career and check if they can find time to talk again. Moreover, if you think somebody in your network might be a brilliant person to talk to for this blog, please connect and help a guy out. I’ll even send you a gift. I swear! Desperate times, desperate measures. 

Phew! This has run longer than I intended it to be. Nonetheless, one down, many more to go! Hope you stick around. :)

Ciao! 

Oh! And one more thing, If you have any feedback about this, I'd love to read them in the comments. Even words of encouragement will do just fine.
