---
layout: single
title:  "The Notion of Keeping it Together"
date: January 26, 2020
tags: product management
excerpt: A strategy to grow the users of Notion     
---
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/giphy (2).gif" caption="credits: giphy" %}

A month ago, when I committed to writing a weekly blog I knew it wasn't going to be easy. But what I didn't know at the time was that it was going to be this difficult. Over the last week, I have constantly thought about writing something for the blog and even wrote one. But it was something that did not pass the quality threshold that I had set for myself. Recall in the first [post](https://sidmundhra.github.io/the-mvp/), I said I was going to do a series called 'This Month in Memes'. Well, I've canceled it. I wrote a post for it, even published it, but as much as I wanted to enjoy it, it did not feel right. So I deleted it. (To the 6 people who saw it, I apologize for that extra click of yours). I realized that this is not the apt platform to submit something as informal as memes and nobody is going to benefit from it. So yeah, that stands canceled!

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/giphy3.gif" caption="credits: giphy" %}

My primary goal for this blog was to publish something I can learn from and everyone who reads it takes away something from it. For the past two days, I even battled the idea of not publishing anything. Nobody will know, I thought. But I forgot I wasn’t doing it for anybody, I was doing this for myself. Anybody learning from it was a by-product. It was I who wanted to learn in the first place. If I can’t hold myself accountable, then that’s a weak commitment. And then something happened today, I missed writing. Something. Anything. And by sheer luck, I chanced upon this [tweet](https://twitter.com/sriramk/status/1221882747515359234) by one of my favorite product leaders of the last decade, [Sriram Krishnan](https://twitter.com/sriramk), talking about how “nothing is too basic” when it comes to writing online. It felt like he was directly talking to me although he’s only come to know of my existence exactly once in my 26 years of existence on Earth. (I am not discounting the chance if I was a different life-form before coming to Earth. #H2G24lyf). A few days ago I had also listened to his 2-hr long insanely insightful podcast with [Andrew Pompliano](https://twitter.com/APompliano) where he talks about how writing online is a selfish act, a medium to meet interesting people, and to put clarity in your thoughts. It’s also a pretty vulnerable act if you ask me. I get jitters when I hit ‘publish’. On the same podcast, he discussed an idea. Publishing a product strategy for a product you like/dislike. It then hit me, this is what I SHOULD be doing. I should be publishing memos, not memes! Therefore, with that established, I now plan to write a product strategy whenever I don’t have content to write about.

To the uninitiated, a product strategy memo/doc is a document that describes the strategy executed to scale a product or to introduce new features to a product. A lot of PM interviewees go through this question when preparing for their interviews and is one of the toughest questions asked by the interviewers. The sole purpose of this document is to lay out the logic behind the ‘why’ of any growth effort that a company undertakes. Some really good examples of such documents can be found [here](https://sriramk.com/memos/zuck-unity.pdf), [here](https://sriramk.com/memos/goldberg-music.pdf), and [here](https://sriramk.com/memos/elop-burning-platforms.pdf). With that out of the way, it's time to start the fun part.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/notion-logo.png" caption="credits: Notion.com" %}

**Notion**

A product that I encountered recently that I instantly fell in love with is Notion. It’s astonishing how very few people in my circle know of this beautiful, highly customizable, all-in-one workspace tool. (Granted my circle comprises of a very limited subset of tech-savvy people but I know even they would use it.) Released in June 2018, Notion is a note-taking and collaboration application with markdown support that also integrates tasks, wikis, and databases. As far as Notion goes, it’s a tool that I’ve been using for a week and now I can’t work without. It’s a powerhouse of features with the simplest of design. They have the most delightful UX for any workspace tool I’ve used. To define Notion in one single product is difficult. Notion is a note-taking tool. It’s a knowledge-base building tool. It’s a project management tool. It’s a database tool. It is truly an all-in-one workspace tool. If you think I’m exaggerating, go to their [Product](https://www.notion.so/product) page and see for yourself. It did come as a surprise that no one in my immediate circle knew of it given the amount of praise it was garnering online from multiple credible sources. (Fun Fact: [Akshay Kothari](https://www.linkedin.com/in/akothari/), former Head of LinkedIn India, is currently the COO of Notion.)

BUT, I'm not here to fanboy over Notion. I'm here to brainstorm ideas. The question I'm trying to answer today is 'How would I grow Notion's userbase'. Given the multitude of problems it solves really well, it can be quite difficult to find a way to improve it. Not only that, they have implemented every growth strategy that I could think of when I sat to write this. Marketing Campaigns, check. Online presence, check. Campus/City Ambassadors, check. Blog, check. Podcast, check. Trust me, I had to spend hours using it to find loopholes and define a strategy to grow it from where it is today. The following is what I could come up with:-

**Competition Landscape**

Since Notion accomplishes a bunch of tasks, the competition differs on the basis of the task it achieves. For note-taking, the biggest and the closest competition it faces is from Evernote. Other apps include Dropbox Paper, Google Docs, OneNote, and Notability. For project-management, it faces competition from products like Trello, Asana, Jira. Likewise, for knowledge-base, there’s Confluence, Github Wiki, etc. So Notion is taking on a whole bunch of apps and replacing it with one tool for all of their functionalities. At this point, it’s just a case of generalization vs specialization.

Evernote had been the most popular note-taking app for a long time before other competitors entered the market and ended its dominance. Evernote’s entire value proposition is defined as a note-taking tool. It had the first-mover advantage and currently has the most number of active users for note-taking. Evernote’s biggest strength is in its singular focus goal. To be a note-taking app and be damn good at it. There are other features like OCR scanning and exporting abilities that make it great. However, in recent years, it has been in the news surrounded by controversies and privacy issues leading to Evernote’s position in the market fumbling. This has led to opportunities for other note-taking apps in the market like Notion.

Similarly, in each market that Notion has tried to disrupt, there are some early established players like Atlassian, Microsoft, etc. They might not have everything that Notion does but they focus on solving one problem and build a solution around that single problem. Every feature on that product is supposed to help solve that one single problem. For Kanban boards, there’s Trello, for Product Roadmaps, there’s JIRA. The advantage that these apps enjoy is that they’ve become the de-facto apps for companies because of being in the market for over long period of time. For a big chunk of price, these apps offer limited features and rigid structures. To disrupt these positions, any competition that pops up needs to gain the trust of the long-time users of these apps and provide all of the features that these apps offer in a better, cheaper manner. This is where Notion comes in.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/getstarted.png" caption="credits: Notion.com" %}

When I signed up on Notion, it did all of this and more. The first striking thing about Notion is the simplicity of its design. Notion’s clean design with a sprinkle of emojis immediately makes anyone a fan. Its features include multiple workspaces, customizable document styles, different views, multiplatform support, and efficient importing abilities. Its biggest strength, however, lies in the community-built templates that one could customize to their uses. For Notion, the problem isn’t features, it’s acquisition and retention. Because Notion offers a whole suite of features, most of the users undergo a learning curve for effectively using it. While Notion has made this simpler by providing templates, it does get a bit overwhelming to understand how to effectively use them(Thanks, Youtube!). Another advantage that Notion enjoys is that its features come at a fraction of the cost than most apps in the market solving similar problems. It is free for students and very recently launched a Notion for startups program wherein a startup receives $1000 worth of credit towards the ‘Team’ plan. With all these strategies already in place, here are 3 ways I see them growing their userbase:

**Growth by Innovation**

When Notion launched, it was considered as an immediate competitor of Evernote. Notion stood its own towards that competition by offering the same value proposition but in an innovative way. Notion currently grows its users by offering almost all features that Evernote provides, though in a better manner, including the tags functionality(the major one), the web clipper(runner-up major) and the ‘import from Evernote’ function. Innovation does not mean ‘copy thy competitor’. It’s more along the lines of adding value to the existing solution better(Looking at you, Instagram!). In other words, it’s about capturing that one use-case and getting it right. The team understands that a big chunk of their userbase relies on Evernote and to win over these users they would need to provide a hassle-free way for them to jump over to the other side. 

Yet, Notion misses some of the features like OCR, which is paramount to a lot of students for notes. However, this strategy seems to be working well because almost every comparison I have seen on the Internet between the two apps, Notion almost always comes out as the winner. With that being said, now that Notion has gotten its core note-making use-case right, it should parallelly look toward their other immediate competitors like JIRA, Trello to figure out what is that one feature that would help customers transition smoothly from their respective platforms. This would ideally help the customers residing on these platforms to give Notion a solid thought and challenge the status quo.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/allinone.png" caption="credits: Notion.com" %}

**Growth by Platform Improvements**

A big part of why a lot of users bounce from Notion is that their mobile apps are not yet as efficient as most of their competitors. While using Notion on an iOS, a browser, and a desktop is an amazing experience, it’s really slow to load on Android phones, thereby limiting productivity on the go. The usual startup times on an android phone for Notion is ~15 seconds, which, in UX world means ‘boy, bye!’. This alienates a big chunk of users who primarily use their phones for work. Notion works well on iOS and most browsers, but it’s of crucial importance that it works like a charm on Android as well. Once they figure this bit out, it sets them up for growth as the users will find it easier to access the system everywhere they go no matter what platform they are on. This will be a big win to have as the apps enjoying the current status of market leaders perform well on every platform.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/team.jpg" caption="credits: Notion.com" %}

**Growth in Enterprise Markets**

One of the biggest challenges that Notion faces is in entering the enterprise market of large companies. With its clean design and playful emojis, Notion exudes an aura of a platform meant for the younger generation of users. However, a lot of enterprise systems run on legacy systems with little to no well-designed UI. These enterprise companies are investing in new technologies as they keep growing a task force that’s increasingly consisting of a young, emoji-enjoying crowd. These enterprise markets remain to be untapped by new startups for some reason. One solution to penetrate these markets could be offering custom, readymade Notion workspaces for companies that could be built by the current templates. This would enable Notion to build a large set of users with constant revenue and also give them access to identify the needs of larger companies.

Another market that would work well for Notion is the online media market consisting of magazines, influencers, and other media publishing websites. The online media market runs on content and collaboration, both of which Notion solves pretty well. If you look at videos of people using Notion, you realize that most of them fall into the category of a young army of content creators or media websites. For any media publishing website, a collaboration between their creators is key for any piece of information. With Notion, they have a way to share and schedule pieces on one, single platform instead of juggling between multiple platforms. Right from writing the content to publishing it, everything can be achieved on Notion. The media market is huge and if tapped successfully, would enable Notion to become a key player in the project management industry.

In summary, I think Notion can grow its user base through feature innovation, platform improvements, and new market penetration. In particular, by developing a fast, responsive android app and offering better features akin to the competition, Notion could get access to a whole suite of new users. Notion can also increase its users by replacing legacy systems in large companies and the media industry.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/posts/TNOKIT/engg.jpg" caption="credits: Notion.com" %}

Please know that I do not claim to be an expert at anything(except maybe Indian vegetarian food) neither am I the right person to comment on strategies to be undertaken by any organization. For what it’s worth, I just started my product strategy and innovation class and this is just an exercise for me to apply the concepts I’ve been learning in the class. For all I know, Notion might even be aware of these strategies and is actively trying to achieve this with their team. But for now, it is exciting to see how Notion grows on the path of becoming a billion-dollar company. I, for one, can’t recommend Notion enough to all my friends and connections. There’s a learning curve, I agree, but beyond that learning curve lies a system of efficiency.

**Bonus**: Here's the video version of the podcast with Sriram Krishnan. It's a really good watch/listen if you're interested in learning how Zuck, Evan Spiegel, and Jack Dorsey differ in their styles of strategy thinking and why you should start writing.

{% include video id="QZUnhrHKxww" provider="youtube" %}

**P.S**. - I'm visiting SF the first week of next month and would love to meet anybody who is up for long walks(+ conversations) and coffee. If you're around, please shoot me a message here, or on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/sid_mundhra).

**P.P.S** - Goes without saying, if you like this recommend this to your friends. No pressure! Feedback is always appreciated.

Ciao! :)